---
title: Analysis general note 3
categories:
  - maths
toc: 1
tags: [analysis series,analysis]
maths: 1`
date: 2018-08-04
---

> Xem các phần khác [tại đây](/tags#analysis-series).

## 3 types of PDE

Tại sao lại phân loại, phân loại làm sao?

$$
Au_{xx} + Bu_{xy} + Cu_{yy} + Du_x + Eu_y +Fu = G
$$

The discriminant

$$
d = B^2(x_0,y_0) - 4A(x_0,y_0)C(x_0,y_0)
$$

at that point. At $(x_0,y_0)$ the equation is said to be

- Elliptic if $d<0$
- Parabolic if $d=0$
- Hyperbolic if $d>0$

If this is true at all points in a domain $\Omega$, then the equation is said to be elliptic, parabolic, or hyperbolic in that domain.



## Distribution sens

[*Distribution spaces.pdf*] Locally integrable on I $\Leftrightarrow \int\_I v\, dx$.

$v=u'$ in the **weak sense** if 

$$
-\int_{\Omega} u\varphi' = \int_{\Omega}v \varphi, \forall \varphi \in C_0^{\infty}(\Omega).
$$

here $C\_0^{\infty}(\Omega)$ denotes the space of $C^{\infty}$ functions on $\Omega$ with compact support in $\Omega$.

If 

$$-\int_{\Omega} u \varphi' = T_{\varphi}, \forall \varphi\in C_0^{\infty}(\Omega)$$ 

then $u'=T$ in **distribution sense**.

The **support** of $f$ is the complement of the largest open set where the function is zero.

Ví dụ kinh điển cho thấy sức mạnh của distribution chính là hàm **Heaviside function**

$$
H(x) = \begin{cases} 1 (x>0)\\ 0 (x\le 0) \end{cases}
$$

Không tồn tại $v$ để 

$$
-\int_{\Omega} H\varphi' = \int_{\Omega}v \varphi, \forall \varphi \in C_0^{\infty}(\Omega).
$$

Tuy nhiên tồn tại $T\_{\varphi}=\varphi(0):=\delta_0$ (theo nghĩa *distribution sens*)

$$-\int_{\Omega} u \varphi' = T_{\varphi}, \forall \varphi\in C_0^{\infty}(\Omega)$$ 


## $L^p$ and bounded

[Câu trả lời này](https://math.stackexchange.com/questions/605162/are-functions-in-lp-space-always-bounded/608037#608037) rất hay. Nằm trong không gian $L^p$ chưa chắc là bounded. Ở đây cũng nói về **essential bounded** luôn.

## Lipschitz domain

Xem định nghĩa toán học dài ngoằn của Ronald W. Hoppe [ở đây (Definition 2.1)](https://www.math.uh.edu/~rohop/Fall_16/downloads/Chapter2.pdf).

[[wiki](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lipschitz_domain)] Many of the Sobolev embedding theorems require that the domain of study be a Lipschitz domain. Consequently, many partial differential equations and variational problems are defined on Lipschitz domains.

---

[[s](https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/97e4/326291627c848a7a4f926cbc73eef3f11b28.pdf)] Lipschitz condition, function: Let $\varphi: R^{n-1} \to R$ be a function which satisfies the lipschitz condition

$$
\vert \varphi(y') - \varphi(x') \vert \le M \vert y'-x'\vert, \forall y',x' \in R^{n-1}
$$

## Dual space

### Why we need dual space?

Có thể đọc [câu trả lời này](https://math.stackexchange.com/questions/670159/why-do-we-need-dual-space).

[[s](https://math.stackexchange.com/questions/670159/why-do-we-need-dual-space)] The dual space is always complete (regardless of whether X is complete or not)

### Some popular dual space

The **dual space** of $H^1_0(\Omega)$, denoted $H^{-1}(\Omega):=H^1_0(\Omega)'$ with norm 

$$
\Vert {f}\Vert_{-1}:=\sup_{v\in H^1_0(\Omega)}\dfrac{f(v)}{ \Vert {v}\Vert_{H^1(\Omega)} }
$$

Trong note của **Pascal Frey**, 

$$
\begin{align*} 
\Vert {u}\Vert_{H^{-1}} &=  \sup_{\Vert {u}\Vert_{H^0_1}=1} \langle u,v\rangle_{H^{-1},H^1_0} \\
\Vert {u}\Vert_{H^{-1}} &= \sup_{\Vert {u}\Vert_{H^0_1}=1}\int_{\Omega}uv
\end{align*}
$$

We have the following inclusion rule $H^1_0(\Omega)\subset L^2(\Omega)\subset H^{-1}(\Omega)$. $\Leftarrow$ Cái này là **Triple Gelfand**.

## Gelfand triple

[[s](https://www.univie.ac.at/physikwiki/images/4/43/Handout_HS.pdf)] Loosely speaking, a **rigged Hilbert space** (or **Gelfand triplel**) is a triple $(\Phi, H, \Phi^{\ast})$ where $\Phi$ is a dense subspace of $H$ and $\Phi^{\ast}$ its continuous dual space.

$$
\Phi \subseteq H, H^{\ast} \subseteq \Phi^{\ast}.
$$

---

I am trying to understand the Hilbert triple $V \subset H \subset V^*$, where $V$ and $H$ are Hilbert spaces and the star denotes the dual space. Eg: $H^1 \subset L^2 \subset H^{-1}.$

## Other

**ess sup** (essential supremum)

$$
\mathrm {ess} \sup f=\inf \ \{M:\mu (\{x:f(x)<M\})=0\}
$$

**ess inf** (essential infimum)

$$
\mathrm {ess} \inf f=\sup\{m:\mu (\{x:f(x)<m\})=0\}
$$

> Xem các phần khác [tại đây](/tags#analysis-series).